by reading all our speeches.
We do need to keep to that.
Yeah, we've already done that.
We've done that?
Yeah.
Are you sure?
Hamjeet sought leave for it earlier.
Great. Good.
Do you need the motion?
No.
You sought leave for the, um, minister to be recorded, and we-
I'm very confused.
Yeah, I
know. I know, it's ridiculous.
Yeah. As s- said to-
Minister. We have the Associate Minister for Education with
us, um, for the end of our hearing, estimates hearings.
Um, we have you with us for, I believe, 50
minutes to be specific. Um, so with that, we have time
for, um, brief opening remarks, just under three minutes.
Uh, so we'll throw to you, and then we'll open for questions.
50 minutes to be specific.
You're very-
I think I can do that in 50 minutes.
Three minutes to start.
Well, fair enough. Um, look, I, I'm grateful for the opportunity to share,
um, all the good news, uh, about what is being achieved in
education. I'm specifically responsible for attendance, school
lunches, ECE, charter schools, uh, private schools and
independent schools and integrated schools.
Um, I'll try and cover off as much of that as I can.
Uh, first of all, in attendance, we have recontracted the attendance services, put
in place attendance action plans, implemented the Stepped Attendance Response
scheme, and altogether, we have seen continuously
increasing, uh, attendance. It's been particularly heartening to see the
commitment that Kiwis have to getting to school.
Uh, every t- day this term, we've seen
greater attendance, uh, than the attendance the year
before, uh, with the exception of about three days surrounding
King's birthday. And the reason I say that is it's significant given the
challenges that people have been facing with fuel costs, still getting their, uh,
children to school. And I think that is a really hopeful thing, uh, for the future
of our country and also reflects the work the government has done and the
additional spending that has gone into the attendance service.
Uh, on school lunches, we continue to see, uh, incredible
savings, $122 million saved, uh, versus
the old scheme. Uh, but the savings are actually much greater
because that's the old scheme without adding inflation.
Uh, we've done that bringing on board a whole lot of new contractors this
year, and we have maintained comparable levels of
surplus to the old scheme. The difference is that those young people
will now graduate and have far less government debt to
pay than they would have had we continued with the old scheme.
And yet we don't rest. Uh, we continue to innovate and find new
ways to do better, and we've put a small amount of money into
examining how the school lunch program, uh, could be made even better.
Uh, charter schools kicking goals with both feet, uh, now
completely demonstrated beyond even the most cynical
doubters, uh, to cost less than state schools.
But it's not really about money. Uh, it's about the magic of
children-
That-
... who are in many cases-
Sorry, mobile yourself
... completely disengaged with education, uh, now getting engaged.
Uh, children who felt that they did not have the capability to learn or education
wasn't for them, uh, suddenly finding a new spark in their
life. And I think that is very, very exciting and a great note, uh,
to go to questions on.
Thank you very much. Uh, our first question is from Ginny Andersen.
Thank you very much, and thank you for bringing up charter schools straight away.
You've previously claimed that the charter school secondary school of the same
size of the average state school would cost less.
How, how many secondary charter schools are they the same size as a
state school?
Uh, well, it's probably more a question of how many state schools are of that size.
I'm, I'm not an expert on state schools, but I'm sure that there would be some out
there.
Could, could we have that information if you don't have that with you now?
Yeah. About the, the, the... You want-- I think the roles of state schools,
uh, will be out there on Education that Counts, but if you'd like me to help you
navigate that, I can certainly assist.
Yeah, no. How many secondary charter schools are the same size as a state school?
Well, again, the, the question really is how many state schools are out there that
are the same size as charter schools 'cause there's far fewer, uh, charter schools
than state schools. But again, the, the, the knowledge of the, the size of state
schools, um, is available on Education Counts.
I don't have it at my fingertips, but I'd be happy to sit down with the member and
use the internet later if she'd like.
That's great if we can have that committee meeting.
Okay.
That's good. Um, exactly how many students are currently attending charter schools?
Uh, around about 1,600.
Okay. And how many charter schools are there in total right now?
Uh, there must be around about 16, I would say.
So how much has been s- spent since the reintroduction of charter schools
on charter schools?
Mm. Uh-
Can we, and if, if possible, can we get that down to per capita spend?
Yeah. So first of all, um, there's been a, a, a very
misleading attempt, uh, to try and make the setup costs,
uh-
Mm
... the per student amount. I would liken it to opening up a
restaurant and saying it costs $10 million, uh, to open the restaurant.
Let's say that they serve 10 pizzas on the first day and saying, "Oh, well,
obviously the pizzas cost a million dollars each." Any sensible person would say,
"Well, how long is the restaurant gonna be around for?
How many pizzas is it going to serve per day in the future?" And then
calculating the cost per pizza from that.
Uh, I think the way that people have tried to misrepresent,
uh, the early days of charter schools when, of course, like any
organization, any activity, uh, you're going to spend
more per person than over the 10 years of the contract.
Um, that kind of misleading activity is precisely
why the government is so committed to improving numeracy, uh,
including amongst young people who could grow up to become opposition MPs.
Taking on board that kids aren't pizzas, are you prepared to
give us the information that we've asked later at a date about how much has been
spent since the reintroduction of charter schools on charter schools?
Are we able to have that information-
Well, that is published in the estimates papers.
Great.
So again, I'm happy to help the
member use the
internet. But
in terms of our children pizzas, they're not.
What I was using is an analogy
where you compare two things that you know are different to show a common concept.
That's nice.
How much on average has been spent on each charter school since they were
founded?
Well, again, that is a question for
the people that work in the Charter School Agency.
However, we know from the analysis that they've produced, that it
will be the amount spent per student times the number of
students. And that-
Can you give us that figure?
Yes, it's slightly less than is spent on a student in a state
school, depending on whether it's primary or secondary.
In each case, it's about $400 less per year per student.
That is the true comparison over the 10 years that they're contracted
for.
Right.
And any attempts to provide cherry-picked or misleading
figures,
I think is just doing a disservice to the standards of political debate in New
Zealand.
Okay, we have a supplementary question from Lawrence Yun.
Quite a few supplementary on charter schools-
Okay
... Madam Chair. Just want to focus, I think it's important for the minister
to understand that the burden of proof on how much charter schools are spending
per capita isn't on us and those in the committee, it's on the minister to be able
to provide that per capita cost.
Yes.
And based on what we're seeing in terms of-
Yes, budget
... budget 2026, 2027, with the number that has just been given,
it is still outrageously more than what the per capita cost and
funding towards a state school student is. That's just simple math.
So would the minister be able to, or the officials be able to provide us
an actual number?
Y-yes. We have provided extensive analysis of the
setup costs and the operating costs of the schools, and
demonstrated that in both cases, the amount per student
is less than for a state school.
The burden of proof is on us, yes, and we have gone to great
lengths to demonstrate.
What we haven't seen, as the minister would appreciate of any good assessment, is
actually the workings. So if the ministry wouldn't mind providing us with a
calculation for that, because again, based on the budget, that's not what we're
seeing.
Well, I think you'll find that the workings are that this is the formula.
This is how much money you get for having a
student in
a charter school. So, there is no working, it's just that's the amount we pay
them, and it's less than the state spends on state
schools across the country.
Again, that's not being reflected in terms of the actual number that the minister
mentioned as in charter schools versus the budget.
But I want to move on and ask the minister-
Well, we've addressed that, though.
And you persist in trying to-- And this is why I gave you the
analogy of the restaurant. To take the costs of a
policy in its first few days and then try and
extrapolate that out over 10 years is misleading the public.
But I also want to give you the same analogy that when we have a restaurant,
there's an initial excitement to it, but then the quality does decrease over time.
So the analogy itself is not-
Not the restaurants I eat at.
I do want to check with-
It's not the fine reports. Stay reasonable, Lawrence
... I want to check with the minister, which is, what is the average class size-
Maybe
...
in the greens before-
Well, again, that will vary by school.
We don't-
Give me a range
... have that sort of a-- Well, look, it's actually very difficult to do because
they've been growing so rapidly. We've had around 700% growth in charter
school rolls over the first year. So you can imagine that it's a very
fast-moving target.
Great. Give me a range as of last week.
So that's not information that we require from the charter
schools.
Right.
I think the thing that you have to understand is that we are
giving the money, slightly less money actually, than a
state school would've got for teaching the same student-
Box. Yeah. Okay
... and asking them to get the outcomes, and the outcomes are charter school
students show up to school more, and they achieve more.
That's the outcome that we want. We don't get involved in
auditing, counting the children in every class or micromanaging how
they operate. So, I can understand why some people might ask that
question, but what I'd say to you is that that's a misunderstanding.
We are not, as the government, telling them how to run the school.
We are requiring them to get results.
And the other difference is that they can actually be shut down for failing
to get the kinds of results that we contracted them for.
A state school might well have lots of statistics and be carefully managed
in respect of how many students are in the class, for example, and you could have
lots of data, but you don't shut them down when they fail.
And that is the big difference with charter schools.
When you get to a certain-
Questions through the Chair.
Final question-
Oh
... Madam Chair.
The reason I ask about the class size, as the minister will surely understand, with
a smaller class size, it means that teachers and
educators have more time to spend on students, and therefore you will
see an increase in terms of student performance.
That's just what we know of education.
So how then do you see the success
of a charter school being a small class size and having that more
one-on-one interaction per student, when in state schools often we
do see class sizes, Auckland Grammar, for example,
easily 30 students per classroom despite the funding
per capita, FTEs per number of students?
Well, first of all, it's not always true that smaller classes lead to
better results. Many of us can remember our favorite teacher.
Very few of us can remember how many students were in our class.
Second of all, if we accept that smaller class sizes can be help-- Well,
I'm sure you probably do remember the number of people in your class.
Mark would.
But that's not normal.
And it is considered observable.
So-
Well, some would use other expressions-
But I'm trying to be good for the rest of the week.
Um, the-
I appreciate that, Minister
The
other thing I would say that to the extent that you believe that class
sizes are important, charter schools have a unique
ability to lessen their class sizes despite having the same funding.
And the reason for that is that they are able
to redirect their funding. They can spend less on buildings, more on people.
One of the big innovations that I think has come out of charter schools over the
years is that we probably spend, in education, too much on buildings,
not enough on people. It's a people business.
So by redirecting their funding to get smaller sizes, it's very useful.
Another thing they can do, one charter school in the past actually had
more classes per day, longer hours for the teachers,
but the quid pro quo was that they got
fewer people in the class. Now, what's interesting, and especially
for members sitting to my right, is that that school was
shut down by an incoming labor government, and it
lost its business model because it was forced to have union contracts,
which did not tolerate that flexibility.
I think that's a really interesting example for people on the political left to
reflect on. However, there are other innovations that are possible.
If you were to go to Mastery School in Christchurch, for example, they
have a model where they give effectively internships or
apprenticeships to education students from the University of
Canterbury. And this is a win-win because these students get a part-time
job learning on the job under experienced teachers while the
people who... And there's a member here from Christchurch may have visited the
school. She has, and it's a really, really exciting
thing for the students, but also who get more teachers and
more adults in their classroom, but also for these student teachers who
get more on-the-job training. Because I can tell you, everyone I've
talked to says taking on 30 kids for six hours a day is
not for the faint-hearted.
Mm.
And if all you have in training is a bunch of Marxist claptrap that you got from
your university, then they will eat you alive.
And so this kind of on-the-job training is very helpful.
Okay. Supplementary question from Carl Bates.
Thanks, Chair. Thanks, Minister.
So talking about the actual outcomes for students, which is
a novel concept for some-
Mm
... can you tell us about the results that charter schools
have delivered for student achievement-
Mm
... for the students actually attending these schools?
Yeah. So first of all, let me just talk a little bit about being there.
Mm.
So across the board,
we've only got results for the seven that opened in early 2025.
The others, it's too early to say. But in the ones that have completed a full
year, five out of the seven have exceeded their targets, and
most of the five have actually exceeded the government's goal of 80%
regular attendance.
So that's been a spectacular thing.
The two that haven't are schools that were deliberately
set up for students who are completely disengaged.
One of them, Christchurch North College, set up by four state school principals
because they knew in their heart of hearts there were students enrolled at their
school they couldn't reach. And unlike many in the state sector who are hostile
to charter schools, they actually decided to embrace the opportunity to
give kids greater educational opportunity.
So they did this. But of course, that school, every term, new
students enroll who are not in the habit of going to school.
So even though they've made great progress with individual students in the first
year, their average has been weighed down by inducting those new
students each term. But over time, they'll make more progress.
So that's achieved engagement or attendance.
On achievement, we have set
similar targets that effectively mean they have to do as well or better
than equivalent state schools. And again, five of
the seven have exceeded their targets, have effectively done better than
equivalent state schools at a similar level of EQI.
Those that haven't, one of them I point to would be Mastery, which I've just
discussed. Mastery was specifically set up
to take children who were having serious learning difficulties,
dyslexia or other similar diagnosed
conditions. 60% of students at Mastery have such a
condition. So in their first year, they didn't make their target.
But what will happen, and what has happened, in fact, is that the authorization
board, which is made of student educators, Dame
Professor Elizabeth Rata,
Justine Mann, former
principal of St. Cuthbert's College, they will be assessing the
schools and saying, "You missed your target.
What's your plan to get back?" And assessing whether they need
further sanctions. We don't performance manage schools like
that anywhere else in the sector. But in return for having all the
flexibility we talked about, charter schools have that extra accountability.
Thank you. Supplementary question from Parmjeet Parmar.
Thank you. Minister, you released figures about setting up a new charter school for
100 students, which was
$401,675, and compare that
with setting up a new state school, and the cost, as
per your release, was $638,249.
Can you tell us how is it that charter schools are saving so much money for
taxpayers?
Yeah. So that figure you're quoting is the cost of starting
up a new school. If you have a state school, for example, a new
state school, they will actually pay a principal for five terms
prior to establishment. With a charter school, we pay them for one term.
And there's several differences like that where we just don't give as much
money to a new charter school as we would to a new state school.
And then, of course, there's also the operating cost,
where because state schools frequently
get increases in some parts of their funding formula,
they are getting these uplifts that don't always apply to charters.
So as a result, charter schools get slightly less per student
in operating funding.
But we think the flexibility allows them to still outperform.
In fact, we've shown that the flexibility they have allows them to outperform
state schools.
Right. For the supplementary, yeah?
Yeah. So this is about the enrollment demand that, Minister, you mentioned that
it's increasing quite significantly for charter schools.
Mm.
So in the funding that is there for this budget year-
Mm
... are you sure that there is enough to meet the demand?
Well, there will be because the primary and secondary funding
appropriation can be accessed as students shift
from the state or integrated system into a
charter school. That funding follows them.
So, there will be enough funding. They can grow almost infinitely.
And I think it's a wonderful opportunity.
There's been several examples already where charter
schools have actually had to move premises
because there is so much demand.
That's great.
I was speaking to somebody,
strangely enough, from the French Consulate at World War
II Memorial on the weekend, and this person told me that
the French community is so excited about École Française.
You don't have to be French to go there, but it probably helps.
And they've now taken over the building next door.
Similarly,
Mastery are largely, they've got a waiting list, they're constrained by their
numbers.
And there's one other school, I forget which, but which is actually trying to rent
more space. So,
they're literally bursting at the seams.
That's great.
Great.
Thank you.
Supplementary question from Grant McCallum.
Yeah, thanks very much. So, I think it's important to
remember
with the charter schools, the types of schools that are being set up
and the
types of students they're attracting as opposed to your average state school,
because they're some of the very specific, you've already highlighted some of the
very challenging students.
Mm.
And the advantage that brings to the whole system and the students in particular.
Well,
you can't put a stereotype or a-
Yeah
... type of person on the...
If you look at Te Rito, which is one of the great success stories that we don't
hear a lot about. This is way up in Kaitaia.
It's pass the Bay of Islands. It's further than most New Zealand-- You will know
because you're the MP for Northland, but most people, Katie Nerren, she didn't even
realize this was part of New Zealand.
We're not so foreign in Hawke's Bay.
She's like, "It's past Auckland."
So,
this is a school that actually grew out of an early childhood
provider. And one of the issues in the far north is, as some of us
know, is that there's people there who don't always have a
high level of trust for the Crown for a variety of historical
reasons we don't need to go into.
However, they do trust the operators of Te Rito.
And when Te Rito said, "Well, your rangatahi
are trusted and thriving at our three early childhood centers.
What are you going to do next year?" They said, "Oh, we have to go to a state
school." They said, "Well, what if we operated a state school?" So now they
are, and they're just kicking goals with both feet.
Their attendance, their achievement, it's just fantastic.
So that would be an example of young,
five, six-year-old Maori students in one of the poorest parts of New Zealand.
But equally, I just mentioned École,
that's in Remuera, and there the basic
proposition is, if you're trying to send your kid to a primary school in central
Auckland,
and you've got quite a few choices in that part of the country.
You've got private, you've got integrated, you've got state, lots of options.
But why not learn another language-
Mm-hmm
... in French, do the International Baccalaureate,
and have a really good vibe, which they have there.
So you'd be nuts not to send your five-year-old to École, really.
All right. Well, given I have been to Kaitaia, we'll let that one rest.
We have a new primary question from Lawrence Yuen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So this series, I'm sure there are lots of supplementary
questions for us around ECE
delegation. Can I just check with the Minister why has the increase
in funding for ECE been at
1.5%
in this year's budget, considering the inflation is at 4% and potentially
even higher with the fuel crisis.
Mm.
And which is already under funding compared to last year,
0.5% increase compared to a 2.3% inflation.
I think it's worth looking at the last decade.
The increases have been under for a long time.
Mm.
And of course, that has-
Agree
... put a lot of pressure on the sector.
There's no question about that.
Mm.
But I also just give you this thought.
We are operating in an environment where most
areas of the government got no new money.
Healthcare got a billion and a half.
ECE got a little bit.
A few other areas got something. But for the most part,
most government departments, if they wanted more money, they had to save
elsewhere. In the case of ECE, we can't save money because it's just a cash
transfer. So if we save money, we just have to give it back.
There's nothing else we can cut within the ECE budget.
So I think, while 1.5%, you're quite right, is behind inflation.
People are under a lot of pressure. None of that is in dispute.
Mm.
I think the reality is that we actually, given the
circumstances the government faced, gave more to ECE than
most, if not all, areas. Even Pharmac, the medicine budget
that I'm responsible for, didn't get 1.5%, and yet medicines
are an enormous priority for many New Zealanders.
Just a few more questions on ECE-
Mm-hmm
... Madam Chair. So in that case, if it's over 1.5%, how come
kindergartens only got 0.48% compared to 1.5?
This is an expert level question.
Okay.
The reason for that is that kindergartens, unlike
the rest of the ECE sector,
have a
... collective agreement where their teachers are paid by the
state rather than by the ECE. So
because that collective has been ramped up, kindergartens have
effectively got more money than 1.5%,
therefore the remaining operating budget has been increased by less.
So kindy's still got 1.5% overall, it's just part of it was in this increase, and
part of it was in the collective agreement.
That's really helpful, Minister.
Can I just check, so yesterday in the hearing with the Minister for
Regulations, one of the questions that I proposed was that
whether
some of the deregulation we're seeing in ECE actually translates to
tangible, real-world cost savings for consumers.
Mm.
We have seen the cost of ECE only go up despite the fact that-
Mm
... regulations have
loosened.
Yeah.
So how would you respond to the fact that it actually hasn't made it cheaper for
parents to send kids to ECE?
Well, a couple of observations. First of all, great go at that Minister for
Regulations. Second of all-
I thought you might appreciate that
... yeah, second of all, when you were asking him questions, you
forecast that there would be many supplementaries and people would be interested in
the question you asked.
I just hope that today that comes true.
Second of all, in terms of the cost, the biggest driver of cost for
ECE,
is the pay parity regime that was put in place by the
previous government. And what that means in practice is that every year that
a teacher is at an ECE,
they have to get a mandatory pay rise.
Doesn't matter if they're the best, the worst, terrible, if they're there for a
year, they get paid. This puts a ratchet effect on the price
or the cost that the centers face, and that far
outweighs any changes that we can make in regulations.
So yes, as the Minister for Regulation explained yesterday,
there have been significant reductions, or there will be as the policy rolls
out, significant reductions in the amount of time that people have to
spend getting ready for inspections, and checking
temperatures, and all sorts of crazy stuff that we've stopped requiring them to do.
But the biggest driver of cost is actually that pay parity
regime, and I think for people on my right, they need to ask
themselves, is that still a policy they'd like to support?
But pay parity doesn't exist for, as far as I know, for private
for-profit ECE.
Yes, it most certainly does. If they wish to-
Okay
... access the 20 hours free, then-
True
... they need-- Yeah.
You're right. Just a few more questions on ECE.
Minister, other than the 20 hours free that you just mentioned, what is the
most a parent would pay for ECE service here in Auckland?
Well, that is highly variable, but you could start with somebody at
40 hours and 15 bucks an hour, that's 600 bucks right there.
So it's certainly a major expense for people.
And can I also then check, one of the things we see in terms of changes to
ERO report is, and the Minister for Education, and I think the minister, you
also mentioned that it
gives ability for parents to have choices, right?
But what we're seeing in terms of ERO reports for
ECE is it has gotten simpler, it's more vague,
and in fact, some of the things where we
see ECEs being deregistered, they're still operating.
But one of the questions I want to check with you, Minister, is if it's about
giving choices to parents, how come fee schedules are not transparent for
parents when it comes to ECE service?
Well, again, these are ultimately private businesses, so
they have
to think if they want people to come to them, probably one of the
things that you'll want to do is be open and honest about your fee
schedule. If you're not, then there's going to be a
consequence for that.
Well, currently there isn't, unlike all other parts of private business.
You go to a supermarket, they don't go like, "We're not going to tell you how much
an apple is. You just have to keep talking to us and find out." But that's
currently how it's operating in ECE.
There is no transparency when it comes to fee schedule.
Well, I mean-
You can't find it online
... in my experience of visiting ECEs and their websites, they do
tend to tell you what their fees are.
If you know some that are hiding their fees, that's a very interesting business
tactic.
But it's not one I would use if I was running an ECE, and
as far as I'm aware, most don't.
Last question on ECE from me, and other people may have questions.
Mm-hmm.
Can I just check the minister's committed to no further changes to funding rules
until the funding review is complete?
Yeah, we don't have any plans to change-
Yeah, I just
... the rules before-
We
... before the review's complete.
Can I stand?
I think we should, but we're not going to for now.
Thank you so much, Minister.
Great. We have a supplementary question from Hana-Rawhiti Mahe.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Tena koutou.
This is just,
I guess, a supplementary question from last year's scrutiny going
into this year's scrutiny of '26.
In the early childhood education and
scrutiny of last year,
I found that there was a 7% underspend-
Actually, hang on. Sorry
... in early childhood education that roughly amounted to around $30
million. And now Kohanga Reo falls under the budget
of ECE, and there are around 55 properties
within Kohanga Reo
projects that want to be completed,
and only 10 were approved from the government.
Yet last year when I found that gap of an underspend of 30 million,
that could have gone towards paying those 45 classrooms
needed for Kohanga Reo. And the reason why this is so important is because
when we look at the ECE in a Maori curriculum, many Kohanga Reo
classrooms experience
underfunded
facilities such as leaking roofs, damp classrooms, moldy
classrooms, unsafe infrastructure, poor heating and insulation.
And this is one of the main reasons why there are 2,000
tamariki on the waiting list for Kohanga Reo across the country.
And on those waiting lists, those are often the tamariki who are declined at the
door for Kohanga Reo, and one of those reasons are the property infrastructure.
So my questions, I guess it's like multiple questions and
the supplementary, but it's- Where was that money, $36
million, reprioritized in this '26 budget?
Mm.
What are the funding mechanisms
in this 2026 budget for property-
Mm
... for allocating those kōhanga, 45 kōhanga reo classrooms?
Mm.
And is there anything in this budget for 2026 that
addresses the 2,000 tamariki on the waiting list?
Yeah. Okay, so three questions. First of all-
Sorry, minister
... um, as far-- No, it's all right. It's a good question.
So as far as the, um, what you describe as an underspend,
what happens is we put up a certain amount of money based on our best guess of how
many students will show up for how many hours.
But of course, you never quite know because, you know, life's complicated and, uh,
if students don't show up as much as we anticipated, then of course,
um, we don't have to pay out as much to the centers.
Um, what happens to that money? I mean, it would be tempting to say, "Right, that's
free money, we can throw it at something," but we, we have a policy that it just
goes back to the Treasury, um, because oftentimes, uh, there's other
areas where they have overspends, and they, they need to, um, have money
for that. So I, I wouldn't really say it's a- an underspend.
It's, it's just, you, you know, we made a best guess. It was a little bit high.
Some money went back. There'll be other people that got it wrong the other way, and
it all balances out. Um, the second part about the,
um, support for, uh, kōhanga reo, look, I mean, I, I think
kōhanga reo is a, a marvelous initiative.
Um,
and we certainly support it. Uh, and we have, in the
last couple of years, given specific money to kōhanga reo.
I can't remember the, the exact amounts off the top of my head.
Does Secretary might know?
Um, yeah, you put 2.9 million in in Budget '26 specifically for the
National Trust to meet inflationary pressures, Minister.
Yeah, so we, we have, we have increased funding for, te kōhanga, te, te
kōhanga reo. Um, and, and I think that's a, a worthwhile thing to
do. Um, it's just that we, we, we face these pressures everywhere.
Um, and, you know, it's also true that for
most ECE, we don't actually give them money to build their
service. We just pay them for the amount of people that show up.
Um, so we're, we're already doing more for te kōhanga reo than we are for, for
other, um, types of service. And, and some people say, "Can you do
even more?" Um, in theory, yes, but we're just juggling so much stuff in this
budget, which has been a, a tough one for everybody.
Great. Thank you. Next primary question from Ginny Anderson.
Oh, thank you very much. Um, Minister, um, do you stand by your statement that,
uh, those school communities where they have sort of hungry families-
Yes
... and they, um, give the leftover school lunches to those families, that that's
equivalent to shoplifting?
Uh, no, I've never made that statement.
I thought you did make that on the news.
You said when y- they returned those, um, those lunches back into
those communities, that was equivalent to sort of stealing-
No, never-
.. from the taxpayer
... never made a statement like that.
Oh, okay.
You shouldn't believe everything that you hear on the news.
That I watch on the news.
Would you like-- Don't, don't believe the media.
I mean, you see some of the people on there.
Um, i- i- let me, let me clarify. Uh, I was
asked, um, is it important to follow the law?
Because I, I think if Parliament, uh, votes for money to be
spent on lunches for children, then it is against the law,
uh, to take that money and spend it on, you know,
giving lunches to people to take home, for example. So that is a, a point of fact.
Um, then I was asked by a reporter, um, y- you know, do
you, is it important to follow the law?
And I just gave the first example I could think of why you, you shouldn't break the
law. Uh, it doesn't mean that the two instances are the same other than they are
both against the law. Um, but of course, uh, you know, the,
the quali- there's a reason that trusted media has declined in recent times.
They, they don't always, um, reflect conversations accurately in the
news.
Uh, can you confirm that the ministry spends $1 million to
destroy those leftover school lunches per annum?
No, the ministry does not spend that money.
Oh, I, I've seen information. Are you happy if I provide that?
I've seen information that it is in fact costing a million dollars per year to
dispose of the lunches that can't be returned.
Um, i- if I provide that information, is it able to be clarified from officials?
Well, no. The, the money, the, the ministry certainly does not spend that money.
Uh, it's possible that within the operations that the
contractors have, because they're obliged to pick up, uh-
Right
... the trays, uh, I'm sure that within the-
And recycle them
... yeah, and recycle them. I'm, I'm sure that within their internal accounting,
there will be an amount of money, but it would be wrong to say that the ministry is
spending that money.
So did that additional money, whether it's a million dollars or not or leave, did
that come after the fact when there was d- a decision made-
Well-
... not to be able to return those, that food to the community?
We, we pay, we pay the contractors for
delivering the lunches.
Was there a-
Uh, that, that we pay them a certain amount per lunch delivered each day.
Um, how they do that, like, we don't get involved and say, "Right, how
much did you spend on chicken?" Um, that's, that's for them.
So, so when the point came when there was a decision taken, for whatever reason,
that those, um, uneaten meals could not be returned to the community,
was there a revision of those contracts to increase them in order for
those providers to pick up and dispose of the leftover food?
No, because-- Oh, sorry, did you-
No, I, I can speak on this, Minister.
All right.
So we, we required-
He's itching to go.
Chief.
Um, uh, we required, uh, the contractors to have waste
management plans, and that has been, uh, long-standing, not,
uh, subsequent to a decision to not
enable people to be able to circulate, uh, any spare
... lunches out into the community.
Those waste management plans had been in place for some time.
With one set of providers, we opted to provide some
further funding to enable them to undertake the recycling that was
required,
because aluminum trays are quite difficult to recycle.
Some of the other trays used are quite difficult to recycle as well.
And so we adjusted one of our contracts with that in mind.
So is it still the policy that if schools have lunches that are uneaten, that
they are not allowed to provide those to children to take home or to give to the
community?
That's right. One of the things that we have changed is that we have put in
place an ordering system where the principal or the person
in charge at the school is supposed to order the right amount of
meals for the number of children expected to show up to school that
day.
That is a prudent use of taxpayers' money and resources.
You can't just order extra ones so you can use them for other purposes.
That's not why
the parliament has given the money from the taxpayers to
the school lunch program.
And how do you-
And start-
Oh, sorry. Last one. How do you order that?
But three ago was the last one, but-
How do you audit that? Do you go around and inspect schools to make sure that
principals aren't ordering extra for hungry families?
And do you find out if they're doing that, and do they get in trouble for doing so?
Well, I don't know if they get in trouble.
There are some schools that have been persistently
reporting high surpluses, and the Ministry of Education has certainly
been, in a constructive way, getting alongside them and saying,
"Look, you're supposed to order the amount you need, not
extra."
And we'll continue to do that. But I wouldn't describe it as getting in trouble.
And do I go around and audit them? No, I don't.
Okay. Supplementary question from Pamji Kumar.
Yeah. Minister, you've partly answered this, because I was going to ask about the
guidelines that the ministry give to schools to stop over-ordering because it's
important that the food remains focused on students during
school days. So are you able to elaborate on that, how that kind of works?
I feel I should listen. They've got such an eager official here, I should give him
another go.
Thanks, minister.
So the guidelines really do set out for
schools to provide certainty to
the contracted providers around the number of meals needed
each day that enables us to ensure we're matching
demand
in some circumstances. And we're working through where we've
found surplus.
Some of those circumstances will be the kids themselves
have opted not to eat that particular lunch on that day, even though it's
well-tested. In some instances, they dislike those green
things, those little vegetables and things that are in
there for nutritional reasons. And so we've got a bit of work to
do to attract students a little more to some of the
products. We've got a little bit of work to do around getting the
nutritional value, the snack
component, get all of that aligned.
We really need schools to work with us on
making sure those order numbers are right from the outset.
Mm-hmm. Supplementary question, Lawrence Yunane.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just on the question, so in
October last, or probably earlier, if you're absolutely right,
the School Lunch Collective was awarded an extra $1.6
million excluding GST for waste disposal.
Are you forecasting any sort of-- And that's not part of budget
2025. Are you forecasting any additional expenditure when it comes
to school lunches for waste or for any other aspects in this year's
budget going forward?
That particular contractor was only required to pick up
waste or recycling every second day.
So that was really the big difference.
In the contract, it was only every second day, and actually,
we quickly worked with schools to recognize actually that
needed to be picked up daily.
So-
So that was the adjustment, it was to fund that change.
In this year's contracting, and we're setting out into
procurement currently, so I can't go a lot into the detail-
Sure
... around procurement.
But what I can signal to you is we've put
2.6 or $2.9 million aside for innovation this year.
2.9, okay.
And we're currently seeking,
through RFI,
some interests from people regarding
how they could support us to think through innovative
approaches to school lunch delivery.
Thank you so much.
Okay. All right. A further supplementary from Vanessa Wienink, and then we'll move
on to our next primary.
Thank you very much. So I've tasted a couple of these school
lunches. One of the interesting things I found was that they
had-
... it was on two different days, and two
different chicken menus apparently.
I can't remember the names, I'm sorry.
But it was the same chicken, but different.
One had rice, and one had,
I think it was pasta. So it was almost exactly the same thing, but
one with rice and one with pasta, but they had a different name.
And the principal told me that one of the reasons that the students
start to
refuse some of the items is that it's essentially the same
thing that they're getting,
or they've seen quite frequently,
just with a different base. Like a different-
Yeah
... How much variety is in the
menu to keep the interest of the children?
Well, there's no question that
probably the most frequent complaint that we've had this year is
what we'd describe as meal fatigue, and that people are having the same
thing too many times.
So I've actually given that feedback to the ministry and contractor,
and they are currently experimenting with new recipes
and new compositions. If memory serves, there's about seven different
meals. But they're going to swap out and put some new ones in for precisely that
reason.
Mm-hmm.
It's not that the quality's declined-
No
...
but they just basically have the same thing a lot of times.
So-
Yeah
Yeah. Thank you. Okay, further supplementary, then we'll move on.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Further to that, because from the start you have said that
your goal is to maximize value for money in this program, and with this
feedback, are you confident that that will continue the kind of saving
that you have made in this program?
Yeah, I am. In a past life I wasn't so keen
on this policy at all, but here I am managing it.
It's the manual.
And I do it to the best of my ability.
Yes.
And that means continuous
contract management, which involves occasionally getting
complaints from the customer, which is the student and the school,
and going back to the contract saying, "Hang on, guys, you've got to pull your
socks up here." So
such is the burden
of me for at least
another five months. Unless by some extraordinary
sequence of events, I get reelected and given the same job again,
which I guess is always possible.
All right. Thank you. We'll move on now to the next primary question from Grant
McCallum.
Yeah. Thank you, Madam Chair.
School attendance is obviously something, a major
focus for you, and the importance of that is
obvious. What progress are you making? Where are the barriers?
Where you must be getting to the stage now you're starting to see some real
barriers that you need to try and
help students and schools to address.
Look, so far we've made almost continuous progress.
If you look at
the start of 2024,
every term bar one has had better attendance than
the same term one year earlier. So
there's not much point in comparing a term one to a term two because they're
different seasons and term four has exams and all the rest, so there's
always differences between terms within every year.
So year on year is the right comparison.
There's only been one term where we didn't do better than the same term one
year earlier, and that I think was term one last year, or was it term four?
Anyway, it's one of the recent terms.
And that was a term when there was an extraordinary amount of
illness
which really hit our numbers hard, and you could actually see it on a specific set
of days.
So we've made continuous progress so far.
I'm mindful that to keep getting the gains and reach our goal of
80% of students attending 90% of the time by the end of the decade, we're going
to have to keep pushing, and I would say that the biggest
barrier in the long term is going to be
parents who just won't play ball,
and that's why we've started prosecutions.
There's been so far
36 that have been liable to a prosecution.
At least that's a figure from about a month ago.
Of those, 18,
once they were threatened with prosecution, said, "No, actually, we'll send our
kids back to school, thank you very much." So that was quite effective.
Seventeen remain under process. A further one
had a court date set,
but sadly did not show up for
court. So you can see that potentially in that family, attendance is a
multigenerational problem and not just at school.
However, a new court date was set, and at some
point, we are going to start making it clear that this is an
obligation. This is like many other crimes people commit,
and this is not quite a crime, but it is a real offense
against your children's future. This will only
apply to people who could send their children to school.
They don't face any other barriers, they just won't, and transitory people.
Frankly, I don't think that any parent has the right to deny their children
a future like that. If they can't get there, we'll do everything.
We'll move heaven and earth to help them.
The attendance services out there, the resources, the funding.
We'll try and get them to school. But if they just won't, well, I'm sorry,
but that's not good enough.
Thank you.
Thank you. Supplementary questions from Lawrence Yunane first.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just to signal that my primary is also on attendance, so
I'll just-
Okay
... ask my-
Yeah. Go for
it.
Minister, can I just check, so one of the things we do want to address is
unjustified attendance, I think in particular.
In terms of data, we've seen some of the trajectory of attendance, which is good.
Would you be able to break it down into how has that improved?
Have you seen improvements in justified attendance as well as unjustified
attendance? Does
the data go into that level of granularity?
Absence you mean? Justified-
Justified absence
Sorry, justified absence and unjustified absence, my apologies.
Look, it does. I wouldn't want to try and rehearse that off the top of my head.
I don't know if we have-
If we can get that
... but very happy to provide it. The data is published
frequently.
That'd be appreciated if you can get it.
It's on the Education Counts website.
Yeah. If it can get down to that level of granularity.
Further questions.
I guess one of the things is that students could be attending, and we've seen
recently from Curriculum Insight, but students' engagement and enjoyment
potentially may not be up. So just because students are attending doesn't
mean they are also learning. I wondered if the minister have given any thought
to now they're at school, well, what else are we going to be able to do to keep
them at school to ensure that they are engaging with the material?
Well, this is a very
new age concept. You don't go to school to enjoy it.
You go because you have to, and you need to learn.
Look, I think
in terms of what motivates students to go to school,
I don't know that making it more fun is what is needed.
I think what is needed is a sense that if you go to school, you
will get valuable knowledge that will enhance your future that you can't
get elsewhere. I think some of the most important things that we're doing is
actually just improving the curriculum, the level of
teaching, because children, like most people, want to
build their self-esteem, and it's called self-esteem because only you can do it for
yourself. So we are committed to improving
Uh, the quality of teaching and the- ...
level of knowledge available,
so that children really will feel that there's a valuable service at school they
can't get elsewhere that's essential to their future.
That, I believe, is one of the most important things we're doing for attendance in
the long term.
Can I just also check, in terms of attendance, one of the things we do hear from
schools is the fact that now having a more
strict ...
chance, opportunities to have more flexibility because you get
students who, or family who may want to do some part of it as
homeschooling, some part of it as other sort of engagement.
But now they won't be able to do that because the attendance is so
specific.
Well, I mean-
Is that an accurate assessment?
One number that I think is important to just keep in mind at all times
when talking about school attendance, schools are actually only open for, like,
180 days a year. I mean, there's like 185 other
days every year to do family and sports
and culture and fun and go on holidays.
I mean, you only have to show up to school like 50% of the days.
I don't think that's too much.
Okay.
We have a supplementary question from Ginny Anderson.
Thank you very much. In terms of since the new attendance
programs come in, we've seen sort of a bit of a polarization in the data
with particularly some areas,
one in four Pacifica attending school, and we see that
sort of Auckland itself and South Auckland is really in
crisis, with the ministry saying that
term four 2025 regular attendance rose,
and that meant that 80 to 90,000 students are missing school for three
weeks or more. So that's a chronic long-term attendance,
hasn't shifted with the threat of
penalizing parents or fining parents.
What else do you think you can do to shift the dial in that space if fining the
parents hasn't seemed to move?
Yeah. Well, first of all, I agree that there is a
problem in the data, which is that we haven't got the same level of
increase in Pacific attendance as we have for other groups.
I wouldn't say it's polarized, I'd just say that
most groups have increased, Pacific students don't seem to have.
And I guess ultimately that is a challenge for some of those schools
in South Auckland that have high Pacific
enrollment, and it's also a challenge for the attendance services,
and I'm always open to feedback from principals and the
attendance services in the area about do we need to switch up our
policies to make it work for them as it seems to be working
for most other parts of the country.
Is there anything in the budget that looks at addressing those underlying drivers
that might be causing non-attendance, such as poverty
or other complex issues?
We know locally from one of my schools that
the PB4L,
Positive Learning Behavior for Learning, was one mechanism they were using
to address those underlying drivers.
Mm.
I know it's not all gone. We've heard that today.
But that's been cut under this budget.
Can you point us to some areas where your government is addressing those
underlying drivers of non-attendance?
Yeah. So, in the 2025 budget-
Mm-hmm
... we, and I mean, we can have the whole debate about
housing and welfare payments and the economy and all the rest.
I'd just make the point that we've had a major
increase in stress on household budgets, particularly poorer household budgets,
since the price of fuel went up so dramatically.
And so, it's kind of been a really interesting experiment.
If you suck a bunch of money out of household budgets, do you
see attendance amongst poorer households decline?
And the answer is, we didn't. So, I think in a way, we're kind
of proven that-
Mm
... a lot of people don't have much money, but they still send their children to
school.
Mm.
On the other hand, in this topic, which I'm responsible for,
we've increased the attendance service funding by $20 million.
We've increased it by about a half in 2025.
We noticed that many of the attendance services that were, appoint, were
contracted, sorry, weren't doing the job, so we basically canceled
all their contracts-
Mm
... recontracted the ones that were good, and improved the service that way.
And of course, we've got these attendance action plans that I went around the
country, did round tables with principals from the coal face and they helped
me design the stepped attendance response scheme that is the
foundation for the attendance action plans.
So,
these are the things that we've done, and so far, our record,
notwithstanding the stats for Pacific and South Auckland, which I agree with you,
it's a serious problem and we need to do better at that.
For the most part, though, what we've done has delivered results.
But Minister, sorry. We're actually done. No, we have reached the end of it.
Oh, what? Over time.
Would you believe?
And we started early.
Yeah. Oh, yeah.
20 minutes. Yeah.
10 more minutes.
There we go.
Oh, look-
So thank you very much, Minister
... Shannon, I tell you what, Shannon Halbert has sat there for nearly
an hour and he hasn't asked a question.
We-
I mean, so-
Not the one to look at
I certainly for a small extension for Shannon.
Has he got a question?
It doesn't appear he does.
Oh, yeah.
Look-
We're talking about attendance services.
How many attendance services were discontinued because
of
inadequate delivery?
All of them, actually, were discontinued, and then we
recontracted the ones that were better, that
were shown to have performed.
Very good.
You could ask the question a different way,
how many of them didn't get a new contract?
And that's something I'd have to check and come back to you.
Follow up later.
But it was a significant amount.
Why weren't schools consulted in that?
Well, actually, schools were consulted extensively when the Education
Review Office went around the country to study attendance services, and what they
were told is that,
overwhelmingly, there were good people working in attendance-
Mm
... but there were some that were just bloody hopeless.
Yeah.
And we have zero tolerance for that.
There you go. Okay. We'll put a pin in it there.
There we go.
Thank you very much. So charitable, Minister
Co-party keep
I'm sure that we will have-
Right. Thank you
... some further questions for you and your officials.
Ministry, yes. Going to have a little bit of time with you.
You all right?
Tie up some loose ends. And I believe I have the chief executive of
ERO here and
Just going to knock on these.
And the chief executive for NZQA is-
Oh
... joining me as well.
Um, and email?
Yes.
No, this is for whole-of-
ERO, so Tim, yes
... government education.
Whole-of-government education.
Yeah.
So I can ask for some of the report.
Yeah. Yep.
Cool.
You have a question then?
Yeah, I do have that email, please.
Yeah.
Bird.
Do enjoy that, the green stuff.
Do now, it's green.
Yeah.
The green stuff that they have for nutrition week.
So I'm assuming peas, broccoli, who knows?
Peas or, yeah, exactly. Beans, God knows.
Yeah.
Honestly, it's the same.
Um-
It's the same. They call it different things for the schools.
Um, thank you.
Passing session.
Don't make me do it. Don't make me do it, no.
You're a teacher.
Um-
It's a problem
... just keen to get cracking. We've actually got a very big agenda still ahead
of us. So,
we need to keep to time. Uh, we have a bit of time with the ministry and various
adjacent agencies to go through loose ends, we've kind of called them.
Things that come up with the minister, ministers,
that either we haven't had a chance to ask or need to ask at an operational level.
May not be a lot to fill the time given that we did ask a lot of those during our
hearing. So just acknowledging that.
We'll just open to the floor, but we had a question from Grant first.
Yeah, thank you, Madam Chair. This is a question about ERO, Tim.
When
I'm moving around various schools in Auckland, some of the smaller primary
schools-
Mm
... um, the feedback I get is that they feel that ERO doesn't
understand their challenges and
the challenges they specifically face in those smaller
two/three teacher schools or sole charge schools
in terms of the way they approach and report back on the school.
Any comment on that?
Yeah, look, I think it's an ongoing challenge for us to make sure that we've got
the right people going into schools where they can understand the context.
Yeah.
We spend a lot of time working with the likes of our leadership partners, who are
people who are seconded in from various parts-
Yeah
... of the sector that we want to put the best people-
... such as those people-
Yeah
... on the schools that need the most attention.
So, as I said, it's an ongoing challenge for us in terms of making sure
that we're doing that well. But by the same token, I'm very confident.
I've been in this job looking at the place for the better part of six weeks
now, and I'm-
Yeah
... got to say, I'm really impressed with the evaluative approach that they take-
Mm
... and the quality of the people doing the work.
Mm-hmm.
And I've been out and actually seen a review
actually being undertaken.
Mm.
And,
so as I said earlier, notwithstanding the challenge around
making sure we've got the right people on the right places to do
those sorts of tasks-
Mm-hmm
... I think the product stands up in terms of the assessments that we're making
about the quality and the performance of institutions around the country.
Yeah, just a quick sort of-
Yeah
... follow-up on that. Do you do any work to monitor that just to
sense test from yourselves
afterwards? Because, I mean...
Yeah, and of course, remember
that every school gets a draft report.
Yep.
That's effectively saying to them-
And then there are negotiations
... "Here's what we're finding." And if there's any pushback in relation to the
process in particular-
Mm
... that's where you would expect that sort of issue to come up.
And then we work through what the judgements look like.
So again, that still doesn't
mean that we're not going to get feedback post the conclusion of
a review.
And we're absolutely open to that and would want it.
Thank you.
Great. We have a supplementary from Lawrence Yunup.
Cool. Thank you, Madam Chair. Just a few specific on ERO.
I agree with what Grant has said in terms of the feedback we
get, and we also get the same thing from home educators as well, who said that
there's a lack of capability from ERO, who
understands the nuances between different kind of educational
systems.
Mm.
So that's something that just to signal to you that the committee
will continue-
Mm. Yep
... observing as well. I also want to check, one of the things that we have
consistently seen is that ERO has the worst
satisfactory rate out of any public entity.
Oh, this one.
And I just want to check within this budget, how is ERO going to ensure at the same
time you're building capability, you are now given more role
because now the director of regulations sit under you.
Mm-hmm.
A lot of things now comes under you,
but you're still getting this really horrible, I guess, satisfactory result and
also there's concerns about capability.
Would you be able to talk how that's going to factor into your work plan this
coming year?
Yeah, certainly. And again, I've been seconded into this role, and I think it's
actually quite a good opportunity to say what... Two couple of things.
First,
we are totally very, very unhappy with that
outcome.
Mm.
And extremely focused upon rectifying it.
One of the things I've done since I've been in the job is interviewed every tier
two, three, and four staff member in the entire organization, one on one.
And been running small group sessions with the rest of the staff with a view
to getting under the hood of those issues and understanding what the drivers are
for that level of non-staff engagement and non-staff
satisfaction.
So I'm very confident that off the back of that, I'm going to be able to make some
recommendations to the incoming chief executive and the PSC around what needs to be
done. And there's some very obvious things which I don't think it's appropriate
that I go into those matters with you today until they've actually been discussed
with the staff and the PSC. But I'm very confident
that we can rectify that.
We'll look forward to it as part of the annual review.
Yeah.
One final question for you is,
I understand there's changes to ERO reporting for schools, but I want to
specifically focus on ERO reporting for ECE.
Now I have mentioned it before that some of the reports I've seen, the way ERO
has reported on ECE has gotten more and more generic.
That some of the concerns no longer is as specific as it used to be.
It used to be a PDF, now it's just a generic one page or website.
And I've also noticed more concerningly, those that then get
deregistered as having severe concerns or having their registration
downgraded,
I think of others who've been deregistered, are still operational.
So what-
Sorry, can you repeat the last bit?
I just didn't-
So-
... quite hear with the door I think.
ECE centers have been deregistered because of a bad ERO review-
Yes
... report, et cetera, are still operational.
Can I just check, what is ERO's feedback loop and sort of
accountability mechanism and maybe-
Yeah
... MOE as well. Yeah.
It's probably a comment that the secretary will want to make a comment on, but
in the first instance up until,
we're going through obviously a legislative change process in relation to the
movement of ECE regulation. But at the minute, our job is
to, the same across schools, kura, and ECE,
our job is to review.
Mm.
And where we see issues that need to be addressed, they are then passed on to the
ministry and they pick them up.
Okay.
So just to respond to your comment, when an ECE is
deregistered, they cease to get government funding and they should not be
operating. So if you are aware of services who we
have deregistered operating-
Mm
... I'd really appreciate you passing it on to us because we will go in and we will
shut them down.
Okay. But do you check it yourself?
Yes.
It's just, okay. Cool.
That's why we have a direct regulation-
I'll double-check. And if I do-
Yeah
... examples, we'd be keen to hear because we'll take enforcement.
Thank you. Thank you. That's appreciated.
Right. Here you go.
You've got the next primary, Lawrence, so go for it.
I also just want to thank because I know that there's a lot of officials here.
Thank you all for coming, and thank you all for the work that you do.
NZQA, because I feel like MOE has had ERO has had a lot.
We just want to be a little bit fair and a little bit balanced.
Every person gets to answer questions, get questions asked.
IQF,
I guess. I would like to know, this is something that we
mentioned in annual review, and we said that we will be keen to see how the
budget works in this year. How would then the budget support
the implementation of that new quality assurance framework?
That's my first question, and I have another question on what the minister
mentioned before in terms of SMART.
Kia ora koutou. Nice to see committee members again, and thank you for the
equity of asking NZQA questions.
There is no specific budget money for the implementation of
the integrated quality assurance framework.
We are doing that inside existing baseline funding.
And I also then follow up, just one follow-up question, Madam Chair, which is
around
what the minister's mentioned before.
So what we've seen, the summary of initiatives for SMART extension to year 11
apparently is no longer the case, and it has now been passed on
to NZQA. So what are some of the work that NZQA then
is doing, and is NZQA then going to develop its own system or
still pick up SMART and just go under
NZQA? How does that work?
So as you know, we currently have digital assessment for
about two-thirds of the end of year exams.
Yeah.
And we use that same platform for the current
literacy and numeracy co-requisite assessments.
And so it would make sense for us to use that
existing platform to deliver the
new year 11 literacy and numeracy.
Can I just check, so in the... Sorry, I did say one.
It's okay. Look, it's fine.
I apologize.
In the summary of initiatives, there was $9.382
million given over four years for extending that
SMART to year 11. Can I check,
is that then just going to go under NZQA or NZQA's already doing
that, so therefore that budget gets reprioritized?
The money will transfer. So NZQA's money comes through Vote Education-
Okay
... and is passed through from the ministry to NZQA.
So the funding required to administer year 11 will
be passed on to NZQA.
That's really good to know. Thank you.
We have a primary question from Grant McCallum.
Yeah, thank you.
Pursuing my theme of small rural schools, which I have a number.
The feedback I get once again is
that the schools that really struggle are principal sole charge or two teacher
schools. And because they've literally the workload, they feel the
principals, they're doing everything and they struggle.
There's a high turnover. I'm sure you're very aware of it.
Have you put anything--
What is the ministry doing to help address these challenges?
We have a very productive relationship with the
rural principals group, Andrew King.
Yeah.
As the minister said, we're out now regularly meeting
with rural schools and principals around the support that
they require. We've also put in, I see Anna Wellenock's joined
me at the table, additional supports around workforce attraction.
Anna, would you like to speak to the rural schools?
Yeah. There's-
You might need to come close to the microphone to be heard.
Thank you. So retention is, and remains, a focus for us-
Yeah
... for teachers and for principals.
So for principals, the retention actually is sustained at a fairly high
level, so over 90%. That's been very stable for over 10
years. Actually hasn't changed very much.
But we do recognize that the workforce pressures
are
significant. In the last bargaining round, one of the
benefits and the conditions that was negotiated was a $15,000
allowance for both primary and secondary
principals in recognition of the workload and the leadership that's required to
actually lift up and take schools through
those.
Yeah. Can I just hop on that for a moment?
So I attended a meeting in
the Dargaville area, a collective of a whole bunch of principals there.
And this is, there was a number of them there, and
some of them said to me they felt what was more important to them was more
staff support-
Mm
... than necessarily extra money for themselves.
Mm.
Any feedback on that?
So one of our areas of focus, as I said, is getting ministry staff out-
Mm
... both to work with those principals, but our leadership advisors,
our curriculum advisors-
Yeah
... and making sure we've got that outreach to them.
As I said, we've got a very productive, probably the most productive relationship
we've had with the rural school network-
Mm
... in recent times with Andrew King, and that's-
Yeah
... providing us the insight we need into how-
... our services need to flex or change-
Mm
... to support them. Because we do recognize that it's a lonely job-
Yeah
... when you're in a small school-
... on your own.
Yeah. And just one final, if I may. Just one of the areas where,
because obviously with the Tomorrow's Schools model with the, you've got the boards
of trustees-
Mm
... and so forth. Is there any
opportunity there for them to work more collaboratively with those
skill sets? Because obviously you've got parents-
Mm
... who just isn't giving out the time or the numbers or the
necessary skill sets to really help the principal.
So under the current Education Act-
Mm
... boards are able to combine over more than one school if they
wish to do so.
Mm.
So that is an option open to them.
Okay.
Some of the other things that we're doing which might be useful to mention is the
teacher bonding scheme. I'm not sure whether you're aware of that.
Yeah. Mm.
It's 185 places that have been made available where there is
about up to $40,000 available over five years
for experienced teachers to move to rural and isolated
locations. So that was very well
recognized and supported-
Mm
... by the rural groups.
Mm.
And part of that is about getting the right kind of support around the
principal to enable-
Mm
... them to do their principalship job-
Yeah
... as opposed to their teaching.
Thank you. Very helpful. Thank you.
Great. Primary question from Shanan Halbert.
Kia ora. Thank you. On
the industry lead secondary school subjects, we didn't get a chance
to speak about it before, but I wondered if you could talk me through
how exactly each ISB is developing their
curriculum areas.
Absolutely. I'll get Pauline Cleaver to come to the table, who's leading this piece
of work.
Mm-hmm.
We have got money set aside in '26 to provide
to the ISBs to support them in the development of the curriculum
subjects. We've also brought staffing into the ministry so that all of the weight
doesn't just land on the ISB to do the work.
But Pauline, you've got two areas underway at the moment.
Do you want to talk the committee through what that looks like?
So we're working with
excuse each of the ISBs, and we've signed memorandums of agreement with each of
them now on scoping out what subjects they're interested in being part
of the curriculum. We'll finalize that subject list within the next two
weeks with the minister, and then we'll start developing the subjects.
We'll have a prototype subject out probably towards the
end of August so
schools can see how the
industry lead subjects shape up and compare with the
academic subjects. Largely, they're driven out of the skills that the
ISBs see the industry needing. And so that's a really important part
of being industry-led. But we also need to make sure that
they're leveled right for the- ...
young people, development age of the young people, in our schooling environments
and how that's going to work. So it's going pretty well.
They're really keen,
keen as mustard, to get on with the job and getting the investment
through the budget, to be able to contract in now for
the long-term piece of work of developing the subject.
Getting resources out
is a really great way to keep the momentum going.
Thank you. And in terms of where would you point me to
determine how you manage quality assurance
throughout that process given-
Yeah
... an industry lead approach?
Yeah. So, as Allan said, we have got a small
ministry team in the curriculum center whose
job it will be to work alongside the development of the subjects to make sure that
they are doing the right things for the age and stage of
our young people going into industry subjects, and that they are
comparable and have that parity of esteem with the curriculum,
and that their role is that quality assurance piece.
And will
all subjects be ready before deadline?
Oh, yes.
Are they tracking?
They're all tracking
well with ebbs and flows. Some-
Mm
... can get a good start, and others are coming through a bit
later. But yes, no, we've got a trajectory, and everything is on track.
Kia ora.
Great. Primary question, Jenny Anderson.
Thank you.
Just in and around the Smart tool.
So we didn't get onto this much, but the information that's on the website, I
think still that is for parents, it says that the child's data
will be stored in New Zealand or safe in New Zealand.
But the information that goes to school leaders say that it's
backed up in Australia. Why is there two sort of different
messages on two different fact sheets in and around the data storage?
So it is true that the data is stored in New Zealand, but
like all
our data, we have to have backups for those.
And our backup, like it is for a number of things, is
with Australia. So it's a backup. It's two different
messages. One is backed up in Australia,
yes, but all the data is held here. No one in
Australia, and this goes back to our security protocols, can
use that information. It's just backing it up so we never lose it.
Was there any reason that that additional information was omitted from the
fact sheet for parents?
No, I wasn't aware it was, and I'd
sort of like to go back and have a look at why we pumped it out in one fact
sheet and didn't in the other. I would say human
error rather than anything deliberate.
Okay.
Missed my evil eye
.
Is there a total cost to date for the Smart Tool that we're able to look at
or find out?
We had a budget of about 13.5 million to
replace ESOL with the Smart Tool.
Okay. And is there a date for switching off ESOL?
Is that going to happen soon or-
Yeah, at the end of this year.
At the end of this year. Thank you.
I've seen reports where there are sometimes numbers as low as, say,
eight students in the whole country completing the assessment for year three
Pānui on the assessment tool.
When will you publish the-- I know the uptake is one, and then
who's doing the assessment. Is there any transparency on when we see-
Absolutely. So we're just going through the final stages of that now,
remembering that for Māori medium, it wasn't
compulsory for the Māori medium sector to use any
mandatory tools this year. And so the uptake has not been as
large as in the mainstream where it was a mandated-
Yeah
... a mandated piece. But we'll provide all those numbers and figures at the
moment.
Sorry,
as soon as we finalize them. We're just going through the checks and the-
And so a month or a date roughly?
A month or so-
A month or so
... I would imagine. Yeah, because we're coming out with the scaling scores and
reports within the next month. So we'll have that all
wrapped up for window one by that time, ready for what are the lessons learned.
We want to tell people about those, and what are we taking through to the next
assessment windows.
Some people who have gone along to the roadshow that the ministry's been running
have said that the ministry has stated that the Smart Tool would be made
compulsory next year. Is that correct, or that's not correct?
No.
What has been mandated, and there is no advice or change that I'm aware of,
is that schools get a choice of either the Smart Tool,
PAT, and currently ESOL.
But of course, next year ESOL.
ESOL.
Just be PAT. Yeah.
Yeah. And no intention or advice on the table to change that choice.
Yeah. And has there been any discussion about the linking of
the Smart Tool and performance pay for teachers?
No, none at all.
Okay. Thank you.
Great. And a question from Lawrence Tse now.
Cool. Thank you.
We've asked a lot of questions of Colleen and the MDF, so we'll try and switch it
up again.
It's so thoughtful, Lawrence.
School transport.
Oh, that's still chief. But I'll allow it.
Oh, still chief. Okay.
You poor guy.
Yeah.
I thought James would play the-
Right. So first of all, I know that there is a school transport review that's
happening.
Yes.
But what I do see in budget 2026 is a reduction in the overall school
transport funding.
In the fuel crisis, can you just first run us through why has there
been a reduction?
Absolutely.
Is it to do with demand?
Yes, it's to do with demand. So school transport is a demand-driven appropriation,
so it ebbs and flows according to demand.
The rules haven't changed, and there hasn't been any move to deliberately manage
funding down.
Can I just check just a few more questions.
The first one is around rural school transport, and we're still hearing a lot of
uncertainties when it comes to rural school transport.
I know there's been a pause-
Yes
... on any of the changes, but those that have been sort of
very quickly removed and cut over the last two years, we haven't
seen any of those being made available or had put in
intermediary measures or interim measures to introduce
those.
So I'll give you an example. The last year, we will have
reviewed 242 bus routes
before something like 190, 270,
something like that.
That those didn't lead to cut routes.
So we had merged routes, we had new routes, we had
routes where they were no longer viable.
So
a lot of those changes had come into play.
They would have come in last year and the year before where bus route
reviews were carried out. What we have paused, in particular,
is some area reviews which had been prompted by public
transport changes. So we have paused those.
There are still one or two where parents or
schools have asked us to alter the route because the number of people
living in the community has-
But just to-
... significantly changed
... but just to be clear, the rules around buses and
school transport, I think was set back in 1920s.
1877.
No, it wasn't 1870. It was 19-
The business? I thought it was 1870.
No, I think we made it into the 20th century.
Oh, okay.
Just. But
the reason we're doing the policy review-
Yes
... is because, of course, as a ministry, we have been applying the criteria.
We have been applying the rules as we need to
do as stewards of the system.
Mm-hmm.
The noise that comes through is around those rules.
So the reason we've paused is because we are taking a fresh look at the rules
that apply to school transport. But we
can't go back and reinstate every single decision we've made
over the last
You know, 50, 60 years
In some cases, that would be quite a detriment to communities
themselves.
Can I just check, I know that we have very limited time.
I want to talk about SESTA because we have seen some terrible news coming out
recently with some of the contractors.
I want to check, what is the minister then doing about it?
Because currently it is not a measure to ensure that SESTA students
will actually get to the destination.
It's just there's no incident on the vehicle.
Is that something that's being considered?
So,
the events have been truly tragic.
Yeah.
And I do want to first say our thoughts are very much with the family of
the deceased young man.
We are in
discussions with the provider in question.
Okay.
We are also undertaking a full review of SESTA
procedures. Who does what, when, where, how.
Because there are a range of responsibilities to making sure a student arrives
safely, both on the school, on the provider, and on the
family. And we're working closely with specialist
school association to make sure that that
review delivers the results we need to make sure we are more assured that children
are safe.
And as part of the school transport review package, can I
just-
No, no. Sorry, there's two things going on
No, no.
You've answered that question really well. Thank you. I'm now asking a new bit.
Okay. Yeah.
Yeah. As part of the overall review, can I just check whether the amount
for things like conveyance allowance and amount when it comes to
SESTAs 125 cap, I think, per day, all of those
things are also part of that review.
So there's two reviews going on.
Yeah.
There is a policy review around, what does the government fund for school
transport.
Yeah.
And within that are the buses, are the SESTA transport.
That's one piece of work.
And conveyance allowance.
And conveyance allowance. So your full suite of what we fund.
The review we were just discussing that we're doing-
Yeah. Very good
... is around child safety.
Yes. Yeah.
So they're two separate pieces.
When would we know? Or no, actually, it will come out as
it, when it comes out.
Okay.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Great. Thank you very much. Oh, we've actually finished our time, unfortunately.
But we will have the capacity to go through a
rigorous scrutiny in December.
Thank you to the committee for your time today. Yeah. Thank you likewise.
Thank you.
Thank you everyone for coming.